================================================================================
free monoids
================================================================================


1. You might think (as I did, originally) that the requirement that a homomorphism
of monoids preserve the unit is redundant. After all, we know that for all a

h a * h e = h (a * e) = h a

So h e acts like a right unit (and, by analogy, as a left unit). The problem is
that h a, for all a might only cover a sub-monoid of the target monoid. There
may be a “true” unit outside of the image of h. Show that an isomorphism
between monoids that preserves multiplication must automatically preserve unit.

if the homomorphism between monoids is an isomorphism, then unit must be in the
preimage of the homomorphism. given this, it must map the following composition
correctly:

h unit * h unit = h(unit * unit) = h unit

this means that mapping unit makes it behave like unit (this doesn't guarantee
that it was exactly the target's unit)

isomorphisms are also surjective, so the target monoid's unit is also in the
image.

therefore, we can construct:

h unit = h unit * unit' = h unit * h (a) = h(unit * a) = h (a)

which means that the target's unit has to be some object in the preimage, but
since we've already established that something behaves like unit when applying
h, it has to be the same one from the first composition, so h maps unit to unit

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Consider a monoid homomorphism from lists of integers with concatenation to
integers with multiplication. What is the image of the empty list []? Assume
that all singleton lists are mapped to the integers they contain, that is [3]
is mapped to 3, etc. What’s the image of [1, 2, 3, 4]? How many different lists
map to the integer 12? Is there any other homomorphism between the two monoids?

this homomorphism would map Id_ListCat -> Id_IntMult, which means mapping [] to 1
h([]) = 1
h(xs ++ ys) = h(xs) × h(ys)

satisfying
h([a,b,c,d]) = h([a]++[b]++[c]++[d]) = h([a]) × h([b]) × h([c]) × h([d]) = a × b × c × d

the image of the empty list would be multiplication by 1, as this is Id in the
multiplication monoid.

image of [1,2,3,4], or 1 :: 2 :: 3 :: 4 would be [1], then multiplied by 2 3 and 4
to equal 24.

for the number 12, there would be

[12]    - 1 permutation
[6,2]   - 2 permutations
[4,3]   - 2 permutations
[3,2,2] - 3 permutations
[-12,-1]
[-6,-2], [-6,2,-1], [6,-2,-1]
...

plus an infinite family of 1s stuck all over the place, since those are just
id. but inaccounting for that, these are the only ones.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. What is the free monoid generated by a one-element set? Can you see what
   it’s isomorphic to?

easy, kleene star of a single symbol alphabet is just all length strings of that symbol.
this is isomophric to the natural numbers
